docs(tree): general schema evolution docs (#25218)
microsoft/FluidFramework: docs/docs/data-structures/tree/schema-evolution/types-of-changes.mdx

---
title: Types of Schema Changes
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Types of Schema Changes

Understanding which types of schema changes are safe versus breaking is crucial for evolving your [SharedTree](../index.mdx) schemas without disrupting existing applications.

## Compatible Changes

The following changes are [backwards compatible](index.mdx#backwards-compatibility).

> However, it's important that applications carefully whether the change is [forwards compatible](./index.mdx#forwards-compatibility) inherently or if a [staged rollout](./index.mdx#staged-rollouts) is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it's important that applications carefully review whether the change is [forwards compatible](./index.mdx#forwards-compatibility) inherently or if a [staged rollout](./index.mdx#staged-rollouts) is necessary.
```

### Adding Optional Fields

Adding optional fields to existing node types is always [backwards compatible](./index.mdx#understanding-compatibility):

```typescript
// Before
class Note extends factory.object("Note", {
    id: factory.string,
    text: factory.string,
}) {}

// After - Safe addition
class Note extends factory.object("Note", {
    id: factory.string,
    text: factory.string,
    color: factory.optional(factory.string), // New optional field
}) {}
```

However, older clients that don't know about this new field will not be able to read it.

> To ensure [forwards compatibility](./index.mdx#understanding-compatibility), use [`allowUnknownOptionalFields`](../../../api/fluid-framework/objectnodeschema-interface#allowunknownoptionalfields-property) to handle new optional fields added by newer clients:

Reviewer: Emphasize that this needs to _already_ be set on the old clients before the field is added. If it's not already set, then this degenerates into an un-forwards compatible change and requires a staged rollout - because the app has to stage the enabling of `allowUnknownOptionalFields`.

```typescript
class Note extends factory.object("Note", {
    id: factory.string,
    text: factory.string,
    // Existing optional fields
}, { allowUnknownOptionalFields: true }) {}
```

### Making Required Fields Optional

> Converting a required field to optional is always [backwards compatible](./index.mdx#backwards-compatibility):

Reviewer: Is it also forwards compatible? (It's not). The section below calls that out, but this section does not.

Maybe for each of these sentences in each section, replace with a little table

BC | FC
✅ | ❌

### Adding New Allowed Types

Adding new allowed types to existing fields is [backwards compatible](./index.mdx#backwards-compatibility), but not [forwards compatible](./index.mdx#forwards-compatibility):

```typescript
// Before
class Whiteboard extends factory.object("Whiteboard", {
    elements: factory.array([TextElement]),
}) {}

// After - Safe addition
class Whiteboard extends factory.object("Whiteboard", {
    elements: factory.array([TextElement, ImageElement]), // New type added
}) {}
```

To achieve [forwards compatibility](./index.mdx#forwards-compatibility), staged allowed types can be used to [roll out](./index.mdx#staged-rollouts) support for reading before writing, allowing older clients to read data created with new types (TODO add a guide on this process).

## Incompatible Changes

These changes will break compatibility with existing data and require careful migration:

### Removing Fields

Removing fields from node types breaks older clients:

```typescript
// Breaking: Removing field
class Note extends factory.object("Note", {
    id: factory.string,
    // text: factory.string, // REMOVED - breaks older clients
}) {}
```

### Making Optional Fields Required

> Making an optional field required breaks documents that don't have that field:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making an optional field required breaks documents whose stored schema does not know about that field:
```

To make it crystal clear that it's the _set of all possible documents_, not the data for any particular document, that determines compatibility.
